LAHORE, Pakistan — After nearly reaching the end of a long and contentious vote-counting process, Pakistan’s election commission said on Friday that the party of Imran Khan, the former cricket star, won the most seats in the National Assembly, setting him up to be the country’s next prime minister.
Although Mr. Khan’s party, the Pakistan Movement for Justice, did not win an outright majority of the seats, analysts say they believe he will be able to form a coalition government, and some of his political rivals, who had been complaining about how the national election was conducted, began to grudgingly accept his victory.
Mr. Khan’s party swept most of the country, performing strongly in urban areas and so far winning 115 parliamentary seats, compared with 64 for the second-place party, known as the P.M.L.-N.
Mr. Khan, who has been on a quest for higher office for the past 20 years, was the favorite candidate of Pakistan’s powerful military. Human rights groups and many analysts have said that in the months before the election, military and intelligence officials threatened and blackmailed politicians in rival parties to defect to Mr. Khan’s side, clearing a path for his victory. Mr. Khan has denied this.
ADVERTISEMENT
Analysts have said the military was intent on ousting Pakistan’s previous prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, who was jailed by an anticorruption court shortly before the election, because he had challenged its hold on foreign and security policy. Many of the candidates who joined Mr. Khan’s ticket came from Mr. Sharif’s party, the P.M.L.-N.
Hamza Shahbaz Sharif, one of the P.M.L.-N.’s leaders and the nephew of Mr. Sharif, said that his party had many complaints about how the election had been run on Wednesday and that some of his party’s observers had been illegally blocked from watching the ballots being counted.
You have 4 free articles remaining.
Subscribe to The Times
But he indicated that his party did not plan to boycott the results and instead had decided to become part of the political opposition to Mr. Khan’s party in the National Assembly.
“We don’t want to disrupt the process of democracy in Pakistan,” Mr. Hamza said on Friday. “The country faces a lot of challenges. Therefore all parties should work in harmony to ensure the country doesn’t suffer.”
In Pakistan, analysts say, that passes as a concession speech.
However, later on Friday some other opponents of Mr. Khan rejected the results of the election and said they were going to block Mr. Khan’s party from taking control of the National Assembly.
ADVERTISEMENT
“The powers that think that everything is in their hands, I want to tell that there is nothing in your hands,’’ said Maulana Fazal ur Rehman, the leader of a small but powerful religious party. He said election officials had been “held hostage” by soldiers assigned to poling stations.
Some analysts said that Mr. Rehman was simply being a sore loser because his party performed poorly, and that even Mr. Rehman, the party’s leader, lost his race. Either way, Mr. Rehman threatened to stage street protests, which his party has carried out in the past with big numbers, causing great disruption.
A representative of the Pakistan Peoples Party, which is run by the Bhutto political dynasty and came third with 43 seats, said on Friday that it had yet to decide whether to accept the official results.
At 11 p.m. on election night, the election commission had finished counting all but three of the contested national assembly races. Complete results can be found here.
Mr. Khan’s rivals have accused officials of rigging the vote in Mr. Khan’s favor, and they said the slow tabulation of ballots, which has taken more than two days, was suspicious. Election officials have apologized, saying the delay was caused by a meltdown in their computer systems that cut off the transmission of results on election night.
Most Pakistanis have taken the glitches in their stride and accepted Mr. Khan as the winner. On Friday in Lahore, one of Pakistan’s biggest cities, few people sitting in cafes or shopping in stores were paying much attention to the political news being broadcast on televisions all around them. Despite vague threats by the losing parties, no major protests have broken out, so far.
Mr. Khan remains popular, especially among young people in Pakistan’s cities, who seem energized by his win. He is known as a strident anticorruption fighter, and in a speech to the nation he made on Thursday, he emphasized populist policies to help Pakistan’s many poor people.
ADVERTISEMENT
Some critics accuse him of being too sympathetic to the Taliban and other extremist groups. Mr. Khan has presented himself as a dedicated Muslim, and in his speech on Thursday he said he wanted Pakistani society to be more like the Islamic welfare state that the Prophet Muhammad established centuries ago.
Observers from a European Union delegation seemed disappointed in how the election had been run.
“Over all, the election process in 2018 was not as satisfactory as in 2013,” said Michael Gahler, the chief of the delegation, referring to Pakistan’s last general election.
He added that the news media had been restricted and that the elections had been “negatively affected by the country’s political environment.”