ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — The Pakistani Taliban have confirmed the death of their deputy commander in an American drone strike in Afghanistan last week. The commander’s death is a blow to the militant group that has been responsible for deadly suicide bombings and terrorist attacks in Pakistan for over a decade.
The commander, Khan Sayed, who also went by the name Khalid Sajna, was the No. 2 leader of the Pakistan Taliban. He also led his own breakaway faction of fighters from the Mehsud tribe, which inhabits the rugged, semiautonomous South Waziristan region along the border with Afghanistan.
Pakistani intelligence officials thought he had been killed in a 2015 American drone strike and were still trying to confirm this latest report of his death. But they saw credibility in this claim because the Taliban announced his death and the appointment of a successor.
His death could force more Mehsud Taliban members to surrender to the Pakistani military “as they have lost the only unifying figure in their ranks,” said Saleem Safi, a senior analyst and a Geo News talk-show host. It could also lead to infighting between the Pakistani Taliban’s factions over the group’s leadership, he said.
ADVERTISEMENT
Mr. Sayed was considered close to the Haqqani network, the militant group that has carried out deadly attacks in Afghanistan and has been a cause of diplomatic tensions between the United States and Pakistan. A feared militant commander, he also claimed to have masterminded the 2012 jailbreak in the northwestern town of Bannu that resulted in the escape of nearly 400 inmates, including several high-profile militants.
Pakistani officials have been critical of the American drone strikes on the Pakistani soil, arguing that they are a violation of the country’s sovereignty. But last week’s attack that killed Mr. Sayed did not elicit a strong reaction from Pakistan’s Foreign Office.
Muhammad Khurasani, a Taliban spokesman, said in a statement on Monday that Mr. Sayed had been killed in a Feb. 8 drone strike in Growek region of North Waziristan, another tribal area. American missiles struck a vehicle carrying the militant commander and five of his security guards as they were entering Pakistani territory from the Afghan side, Pakistani intelligence officials said; all of the security guards were also killed in the strike.
Mr. Sayed had gone into hiding in Khost Province of Afghanistan after the Pakistani Army launched an offensive in 2014 against local and foreign militants in North Waziristan.
After the death of the commander Hakimullah Mehsud in a 2013 American drone attack, Mr. Sayed claimed the leadership of the Pakistani Taliban, which consists of several groups. But he then lost out to the current leader, Maulana Fazlullah, who had been responsible for the 2012 attack on Malala Yousafzai, the teenage Pakistani education activist. Differences continued to persist between the two militant commanders.
ADVERTISEMENT
The man announced by the Taliban as successor to Mr. Sayed is Mufti Noor Wali Mehsud, who also goes by Abu Mansoor Asim. A 588-page book he published online last month, “Inquilab-i-Mehsud,” or “Revolution of the Mehsuds,” chronicles the militant group’s formation and activities, including taking responsibility for the 2007 assassination of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, the first woman to lead a country in the Muslim world.
Mr. Mehsud, 40, is also a Shariah court judge.