LAHORE, Pakistan — Secretary of State Mike Pompeo landed in Pakistan on Wednesday for a meeting with the new prime minister, Imran Khan, saying he wanted to reset a badly strained relationship but repeating American demands that the country do more to fight militants at home and in Afghanistan.
Even before Mr. Pompeo’s plane landed, Pakistani officials were calling on Mr. Khan to cancel the meeting, enraged about the cancellation of $300 million in American aid announced just days ago. The meeting will be Mr. Khan’s first with a high-level American official since he was sworn in last month.
“We have worked closely with the Pakistanis in my role as C.I.A. director; our teams have been working together for a long time,” Mr. Pompeo said on his flight to Islamabad, the capital. “There are lots of challenges between our two nations, for sure, but we’re hopeful that with new leadership that we can find common ground and begin to work on some of our shared problems together.”
He added that the Trump administration had “real expectations” of Pakistan.
But Pakistani officials and army officers are deeply mistrustful of the United States. They say they are being made a scapegoat for the American military’s failure in Afghanistan, where after 17 years of war the Taliban control large portions of the country.
ADVERTISEMENT
“The Taliban don’t need Pakistan for safe havens, Afghanistan is a safe haven,” said Lt. Gen. Amjad Shuaib, a retired military officer who is now a defense analyst.
General Shuaib said the Pakistani military did not have as much influence over the Taliban as it once did, rebutting a frequent American complaint that Pakistan should do more to bring the group to the table for peace talks. United States officials accuse Pakistan of playing a double game, using the militants to protect its interests in Afghanistan — like providing a check on India, its archrival — while benefiting from billions in aid from the United States over the years.
You have 4 free articles remaining.
Subscribe to The Times
But American officials know they can push their Pakistani counterparts only so far. Pakistan is the main supply route for American troops in neighboring Afghanistan, and if Pakistan were to retaliate by closing land and air supply chains, those resources would have to be diverted through Central Asia. That route is costlier and, more important, compromised by Russian influence, according to American officials, who say sensitive materials could not be sent through those states.
Although President Trump said in January that Pakistan had “given us nothing but lies and deceit,” the State Department has recently taken a friendlier line with Mr. Khan’s new government. But for many Pakistanis, the damage has already been done.
Image
Protests in April in Quetta, Pakistan, were set off by a United States airstrike in Afghanistan.
Credit
Banaras Khan/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
Just days ahead of Mr. Pompeo’s visit, the United States announced that it would not distribute military aid worth $300 million to Pakistan. Officials in Islamabad say Pakistan is owed that money for its support of the American troops’ supply lines.
ADVERTISEMENT
The announcement so close to Mr. Pompeo’s visit, and Washington’s apparent lack of interest in damage control afterward, left Pakistani civilian and military officials angry and wondering whether they had a reliable partner in the Trump administration.
To make matters worse for Pakistani officials, Mr. Pompeo is touching down in Islamabad for just a few hours before heading to India, to negotiate major contracts that would elevate New Delhi’s status as a defense partner for Washington.
Mr. Pompeo and his delegation will use the Pakistan visit to size up Mr. Khan, who for years has been a vociferous critic of the United States, its policies toward Pakistan and its presence in Afghanistan. Mr. Khan once hailed the Taliban there for waging a “holy war” against American occupiers.
There was no such anti-American talk in his victory speech soon after the July 25 elections, but he said he wanted to change what he called a one-sided relationship. Mr. Khan said: “The U.S. thinks it gives us aid to fight their war. We want both countries to benefit. We want a balanced relationship.”
While the United States is expected to court Mr. Khan, the real leverage remains with the military, Pakistan’s most powerful institution. Officials said Gen. Qamar Javed Bajwa, the army chief, met with Mr. Khan on Monday to prepare him for the meeting with Mr. Pompeo.
“The visit comes at a key time,” said Michael Kugelman, deputy director of the Asia program and senior associate for South Asia at the Wilson Center in Washington. “U.S.-Pakistan relations are floundering at the very moment when Washington is redoubling efforts to launch a peace process in Afghanistan that will require some level of Pakistani assistance to succeed.”
Pakistan has also inched away from the American orbit in recent years as it cooperates more and more with China. China is investing some $62 billion in Pakistan, mostly in large infrastructure projects.
“Washington’s recent decision to cancel aid to Pakistan emphasizes that it means business, and yet Imran Khan’s new government has vowed it won’t be dictated to by the United States,” Mr. Kugelman said. “The U.S.-Pakistan relationship will need more than this meeting, no matter how cordial it may be, to improve in a big way.”