Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: Via Apple Podcasts | Via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher
Image
Listen to ‘The Daily’: The Afghan-Pakistan Problem
After the U.S. government said it would cut millions of dollars’ worth of security aid to Pakistan, violence in Afghanistan escalated. Are the two connected?
The U.S. government announced this month that it would withhold hundreds of millions of dollars in aid to Pakistan.
In the weeks since, Afghanistan has experienced one of the most violent and deadly periods in its 16-year war.
How are the two connected?
On today’s episode:
• Mujib Mashal, a New York Times correspondent in Afghanistan, describes the sense of terror in Kabul.
ADVERTISEMENT
Background reading:
• After insurgent attacks in Afghanistan killed more than 130 people in 10 days, anger at the country’s leaders has grown.
• Why do the Taliban target Afghan civilians?
Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if you’re interested in advertising with “The Daily,” write to us at thedaily-ads@nytimes.com.
How do I listen?
If you don’t see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.
From your mobile device:
You can listen and subscribe to “The Daily” from any podcast player. If you’re reading this from an iPhone or other Apple mobile device, tap this link to listen in Apple Podcasts. If you’re on an Android device, tap this link to listen in Stitcher or this link to listen in RadioPublic.
Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)
From a desktop or laptop:
Click the “play” button above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’re doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.
ADVERTISEMENT
On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:
Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “settings,” then “flash briefing,” then “get more flash briefing content.” Look for “The New York Times” and select “enable skill.” Now you can say, “Alexa, what’s my flash briefing?” and you will hear that day’s episode of “The Daily.”
On Google Home:
You can say, “O.K., Google, play New York Times” to listen to that day’s episode of “The Daily.”