(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good morning.
Here’s what you need to know:
Cohen releases secret Trump tape
• Michael Cohen, President Trump’s former personal lawyer, is “on a new path,” his own lawyer told The Times on Tuesday. “It’s a reset button to tell the truth and to let the chips fall where they may.”
The comments came after Mr. Cohen released a recording of a conversation from before the 2016 election, in which he and Mr. Trump discussed paying hush money to a former Playboy model who said she had had an affair with Mr. Trump.
• The recording does not definitively answer the question of whether Mr. Trump directed Mr. Cohen to make the payments in cash or by check. Rudolph Giuliani, one of the president’s current lawyers, has said Mr. Trump told Mr. Cohen to write a check so that it could be properly documented.
In trade war, $12 billion for farmers
• The Trump administration has announced an aid package intended to blunt the damage to American agriculture from the president’s trade policies.
ADVERTISEMENT
Farmers have borne the brunt of President Trump’s decision to impose tariffs, as the prospect of retaliation has upended global markets for soybeans, meat and other agriculture exports.
Senator Charles Grassley, Republican of Iowa, said, “What farmers in Iowa and throughout rural America need in the long term are markets and opportunity, not government handouts.”
You have 4 free articles remaining.
Subscribe to The Times
• Despite the economic uncertainty, U.S. businesses are broadly optimistic, with the benefits of the tax overhaul and deregulation seen as outweighing the risks from tariffs, the federal deficit and global tensions.
Trump favorite wins Georgia runoff
• Brian Kemp, who had the endorsement of President Trump, captured the Republican nomination for governor on Tuesday, easily beating the preferred candidate of the state’s party establishment.
Mr. Kemp will face Stacey Abrams, the Democratic nominee, in November, a test of whether the rapidly changing Southern state prefers a Trump-style conservative or a progressive black woman. Here’s how Georgia voted on Tuesday, and an analysis of Mr. Kemp’s victory speech.
ADVERTISEMENT
• Separately, we looked at Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, Democrat of New York, who has recently made a series of policy pronouncements and political moves that could position her for a presidential run in 2020.
A desperate dash for the sea in Greece
• A group of 26 people tried to escape the wind-fueled wildfires that were bearing down on their seaside resort outside Athens on Monday by trying to get to the water.
They never made it. Their bodies were found the next day, some still clinging to one another. At least 80 people have died and nearly 200 have been hospitalized as a result of the fires, which have forced the evacuation of thousands of tourists and residents.
• The Greek government, which has declared three days of mourning, has dispatched its military and called for European Union help to fight the blazes.
Crucial election for a nuclear power
• Pakistanis are voting today, and it will be only the second time in the country’s 70-year history that power is transferred from one civilian government to another. Here’s what’s at stake for Pakistan, an important — if increasingly antagonistic — U.S. ally.
The voting got off to a tragic start: At least 31 people were killed in a suicide bombing outside a polling station in the city of Quetta.
• Imran Khan, who made a name for himself on the world’s cricket pitches and in London nightclubs, is the party leader seen as most likely to have a chance at forming a government. We look at the roots of his political success.
ADVERTISEMENT
Fact-checking Mike Pompeo on Iran
• The secretary of state has outlined an extraordinarily tough approach to dealing with Tehran, its leaders and what he called “40 years of kleptocracy.”
We examined some of the key assertions he made in his speech on Sunday.
• Mr. Pompeo is scheduled to testify today before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee about President Trump’s summit meeting last week with President Vladimir Putin of Russia. The hearing begins at 3 p.m. Eastern.
Image
Listen to ‘The Daily’: The Tariff War
President Trump’s $12 billion aid package for American farmers is a sign that he plans to continue the trade conflict that is hurting them.
Image
Residents sought refuge on rooftops after a dam under construction in Laos failed. At least 26 people have been reported killed and dozens are missing, officials said today.
Credit
ABC Laos News, via Reuters
Business
• Sergio Marchionne, the executive who helped transform Fiat Chrysler from a struggling automaker into a manufacturing giant, died today after complications from surgery. He was 66.
• Steel from firearms melted down at mills around the country has been used for years in construction, mining and more.
• Ivanka Trump, the president’s daughter and a top White House adviser, is shutting down her namesake fashion brand.
• U.S. stocks were mixed on Tuesday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets today.
Smarter Living
Tips for a more fulfilling life.
• When we eat may be critical for good health.
• The benefits (and limits) of using technology to plan a wedding.
ADVERTISEMENT
• Recipe of the day: Chicken braised in vinegar over polenta feels luxurious.
Noteworthy
• The Piano Man speaks
Billy Joel stopped making new pop music 25 years ago, but his fans stuck around. After celebrating his 100th show at Madison Square Garden, he talked to us about writing songs and staying alive.
Image
Billy Joel at Madison Square Garden last week. “I find myself onstage thinking: This is a young man’s job. What am I doing?” he said.
Credit
Chad Batka for The New York Times
• Too haunted by its roots
The Stephen King series “Castle Rock,” which begins today on Hulu, may appeal to some superfans, but it’s not successful TV, our critic writes. Read his review.
• The art of the Australian breakfast
Young expats have transplanted their bright, Instagrammable cooking and mellow lifestyle by opening cafes in New York City.
Image
Breakfast is served at Carthage Must Be Destroyed, an Australian-style cafe in Bushwick, Brooklyn.
Credit
George Etheredge for The New York Times
Here’s more from this week’s Food section.
• Best of late-night TV
Several of the comedy hosts lamented Ivanka Trump’s decision to shut down her fashion brand. “The good news is that no American jobs will be lost, because almost every piece of her clothing was made overseas,” Jimmy Kimmel said.
• Quotation of the day
“This trade war is cutting the legs out from under farmers and the White House’s ‘plan’ is to spend $12 billion on gold crutches.”
— Senator Ben Sasse, Republican of Nebraska, criticizing the proposed relief measure as a taxpayer-funded bailout.
• The Times, in other words
Here’s an image of today’s front page, and links to our Opinion content and crossword puzzles.
• What we’re reading
Prashant Rao, our deputy European business editor, recommends this article from the Russian site TakieDela, via Medium: “As we parse through the latest episode in U.S.-Russia relations, it’s useful to remember that Russia and Russians are different. This translation of a story about how a midsize Russian town embraced World Cup fans from all walks of life is delightful.”
ADVERTISEMENT
Back Story
Well, I try my best
To be just like I am
But everybody wants you
To be just like them …
So sang Bob Dylan on this day in 1965 at the Newport Folk Festival, in an epochal musical moment.
Image
Bob Dylan and his electric guitar in Newport, R.I., on July 25, 1965.
Credit
David Gahr/Getty Images
Mr. Dylan had been expected to play acoustic folk. But after a Rhode Island M.C. belittled the Paul Butterfield Blues Band for playing electrically, he rebelliously decided to go electric himself, backed by several Butterfield Blues members.
He opened on the Sunday night with an amped-up “Maggie’s Farm.” Pandemonium ensued. It was (apocryphally) reported that Pete Seeger tried chopping through the sound cables with an ax, in a folk purist rage; Mr. Seeger later said he was simply upset by amplifier distortion.
Some audience members booed, though it wasn’t clear if it was because of poor sound, Mr. Dylan’s “betrayal,” his truncated set or another reason. Mr. Dylan may or may not have cried onstage.
He once characterized Mr. Seeger’s reaction as a “dagger” to his heart. But as he sings in “The Times They Are A-Changin’,” the windows had been shaken, the walls rattled. Music was changing for good.
Mr. Dylan (to one of whose songs this writer later walked down the aisle) took his place among the world’s most influential musicians. He was awarded the 2016 Nobel Prize in Literature “for having created new poetic expressions” in the American song tradition.
How does it feel to be on your own? At Newport, Mr. Dylan began to answer his own question.
Nancy Wartik wrote today’s Back Story.
ADVERTISEMENT
_____
Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays and updated all morning. Browse past briefings here.
Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European or American morning. To receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights, sign up here.
Check out our full range of free newsletters here.
What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.