(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good morning.
Here’s what you need to know:
A renewed shutdown threat
• President Trump said on Sunday that he was willing to shut down the government just before the midterm elections this fall if Congress doesn’t fund a wall on the border with Mexico.
Republican leaders had hoped to delay such a confrontation, which would distract from their push to confirm Judge Brett Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court in September, and thought they had reached a deal with Mr. Trump on the subject last week.
• On the campaign trail, the new tax law was supposed to mobilize Republican voters and help the party keep the House. But we visited a district in Ohio and found that isn’t how it’s playing out.
Heat wreaks havoc
• The contiguous U.S. had its hottest May and the third-hottest June. Japan has been walloped by record triple-digit temperatures, killing at least 86 people. Record temperatures were also logged on the edge of the Sahara and above the Arctic Circle.
ADVERTISEMENT
An official with the World Meteorological Organization said the extreme heat was not surprising. “This is not a future scenario,” she said of climate change. “It is happening now.”
Our correspondents around the world spoke with people to find out how they’re coping.
• This week’s issue of The Times Magazine is dedicated to the 10-year period from 1979 to 1989 during which humanity settled the science of climate change and came surprisingly close to finding a solution. Watch a preview of the series here and sign up to be notified when the story is published on Wednesday.
You have 4 free articles remaining.
Subscribe to The Times
Star power for Pakistan
• Imran Khan, the former cricket star whose party won last week’s elections, has something few recent Pakistani leaders had: celebrity.
His party failed to win a majority in Parliament, so Mr. Khan will need to build a coalition to become prime minister. But if he does so, his fame could help change his country’s recent troubled history, our South Asia bureau chief writes.
• Among the main questions: Will he work to reset Pakistan’s relations with the West, or prefer dealing with China, a neighbor he has praised as a role model?
ADVERTISEMENT
30 points down but running like a favorite
• Cynthia Nixon thinks she’s being underestimated.
The former “Sex and the City” actress is trying to persuade skeptical New York Democrats to look beyond her political inexperience as she challenges Gov. Andrew Cuomo in the primary.
“Both the media and the Democratic establishment, they’re not quite getting this moment that we’re in,” Ms. Nixon said, “and how hungry people are for a change.”
• Ms. Nixon’s belief that voters in the Sept. 13 primary will reward insurgent energy was reinforced when another underdog progressive won last month: Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez.
Image
Cynthia Nixon, center, has built her campaign on a platform of boundless progressivism, disdain for centrism and higher taxes on the rich.
Credit
Todd Heisler/The New York Times
Image
Listen to ‘The Daily’: Why the A.C.L.U. Wants to Be More Like the N.R.A.
We speak to Anthony Romero, the executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union, about the group’s major shift in strategy following the election of President Trump.
Listen
Business
• The board of CBS spent most of the weekend discussing what to do about Les Moonves, the company’s chief executive, after a report citing six women that included allegations of sexual misconduct.
• With their eyes on blockchain jobs and revenue, small countries and territories such as Bermuda, Gibraltar and Malta are competing to become go-to destinations for entrepreneurs and projects.
• Apple is scheduled to report its earnings, one of the headlines to watch this week.
• U.S. stocks were down on Friday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets today.
Smarter Living
Tips for a more fulfilling life.
• How to revive a friendship.
• Don’t let your phone ruin your vacation.
• Recipe of the day: Keep things simple with pasta, green beans, potatoes and pesto.
ADVERTISEMENT
Over the Weekend
• Pope Francis accepted the resignation of Cardinal Theodore McCarrick, the former archbishop of Washington, after allegations that he had sexually abused minors and adult seminarians over the course of decades.
• In a significant shift in U.S. strategy in Afghanistan, American diplomats held face-to-face talks with Taliban representatives in Qatar a week ago without Afghan government officials present, two Taliban officials said.
• The death toll from a wildfire in Northern California rose to six. Seven others were still reported missing in the blazes, which have burned for nearly a week.
Image
By Sunday, the Carr Fire had burned about 89,000 acres, including this area in Whiskeytown, Calif.
Credit
Justin Sullivan/Getty Images
• President Trump and the publisher of The Times, A. G. Sulzberger, clashed over Mr. Trump’s threats against journalism. Mr. Sulzberger said the president had misrepresented a private meeting.
• The Baseball Hall of Fame inducted six new members: Vladimir Guerrero, Trevor Hoffman, Chipper Jones, Jack Morris, Jim Thome and Alan Trammell.
• Geraint Thomas became the third British cyclist and the first Welshman to win the Tour de France.
Image
Geraint Thomas, holding the Welsh flag, pedaled through Paris on Sunday.
Credit
Pool photo by Marco Bertorello
• “Mission: Impossible — Fallout” earned $61.5 million and the top spot at the North American box office.
Noteworthy
• California’s $100 billion train
In the face of sharp opposition and questions about how to pay for it, construction of the state’s high-speed rail line is underway. Our Los Angeles bureau chief examines the most ambitious public transportation project in the U.S. today.
ADVERTISEMENT
• The secrets to getting into Harvard
A lawsuit accusing the university of discriminating against Asian-Americans has shed light on little-known aspects of its selection process.
• How dogs took over the internet
It used to be that the cat was the big beast online. But lately, dogs are taking over.
In the first episode of the new season of her video series, “Internetting,” Amanda Hess investigates an adorable existential crisis for web culture.
Video
4:34
Dogs Took Over the Internet. Our Souls Are at Stake.
Dogs are order. Cats are chaos. Dogs are loyal and compliant. Cats are … not. Why has the internet suddenly switched its allegiance?
Published On
July 30, 2018
• Quotation of the day
“My grandmother is happy I spend time in a church, even if I’m working my biceps and not my soul.”
— Olivier Pratte, an advertising copywriter in Montreal who works out at Saint Jude gym and spa, in one of dozens of Catholic churches across Quebec that have been converted as attendance has dropped.
• The Times, in other words
Here’s an image of today’s front page, and links to our Opinion content and crossword puzzles.
• What we’re reading (and watching)
Michael Wines, a national correspondent, recommends this video from The New Yorker’s Screening Room: “Take a break from dismal reality. Imagine you lived in a city made of cardboard. And that you were made of cardboard. And that you drove a cardboard car. And then that the city caught on fire. This ingenious short subject imagines all that, with amazing if corrugated realism, and delivers a funny punch line to boot.”
Back Story
“We rise from the perusal of ‘Wuthering Heights’ as if we had come fresh from a pest-house,” a critic wrote when the book was published in 1847.
ADVERTISEMENT
Other reviewers deemed it “coarse” or “repulsive.”
Image
A farmhouse, pictured circa 1940, near Haworth in Yorkshire, England, which is thought to have inspired the setting for “Wuthering Heights.”
Credit
Val Doone/Getty Images
Its author, Emily Brontë, born 200 years ago today in Thornton, England, died of tuberculosis at 30, a year after publishing her tale of quasi-incestuous love between the savage (yet irresistibly compelling) Heathcliff and the selfish (but beautiful) Catherine. She would never see her novel, published under the pseudonym Ellis Bell, become the template for a thousand future romance stories.
Today there are some 60 translations and multiple film versions of “Wuthering Heights,” including in Japanese and Spanish (directed by Luis Buñuel).
Emily, the middle of three literary Brontë sisters (Charlotte wrote “Jane Eyre,” Anne wrote “The Tenant of Wildfell Hall”), rarely left home and had few friends. Naïve, stubborn and prickly, she gravitated to animals and the Yorkshire moors, where “Wuthering Heights” is set. She was also a poet.
And in the estimation of Virginia Woolf, she was a genius on a par with Jane Austen, writing without fear of what the male-dominated literary world might think.
“I have never seen her parallel in anything,” Charlotte Brontë said after Emily died in 1848. “Stronger than a man, simpler than a child, her nature stood alone.”
Nancy Wartik wrote today’s Back Story.
_____
Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays and updated all morning. Browse past briefings here.
Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European or American morning. To receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights, sign up here.
ADVERTISEMENT
Check out our full range of free newsletters here.
What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.