ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — A court in Islamabad on Monday sentenced the former Pakistani prime minister Nawaz Sharif to seven years in prison on corruption-related charges, just months after he was released on bail in another graft case and a year after he was ousted from power.
Mr. Sharif, a once towering figure in Pakistan’s politics who served as prime minister three times, was led out of the courtroom, once again a prisoner.
He has been accused of money laundering, tax evasion and receiving kickbacks, but his latest trial centered on allegations that he possessed foreign assets greater than his known source of income — a government salary.
Mr. Sharif was out of prison on bail to stand trial in two cases. He was acquitted in the second case by the same court.
ADVERTISEMENT
Mr. Sharif was ousted from power last year by the Supreme Court as it investigated revelations that came out of the so-called Panama Papers, leaked documents from a Panamanian law firm. The documents indicated that Mr. Sharif’s family owned expensive properties in London, but he was unable to explain how he was able to afford them.
Image
Supporters surrounded Mr. Sharif’s car as he arrived at the court.
Credit
B.K. Bangash/Associated Press
The Supreme Court then ordered the nation’s anti-corruption watchdog to file three cases against Mr. Sharif.
He has denied any wrongdoing and claimed the foreign assets at issue were owned by his two sons. His sons, who both live in London, were declared absconders by the court.
In addition to prison time, Mr. Sharif was fined $25 million.
The former prime minister has maintained that the cases were politically motivated and pushed by the country’s influential military, with whom he often clashed.
His second term as prime minister was cut short by a military coup in 1999.
The military has denied meddling in the country’s politics, including this year’s general elections, in which Mr. Sharif’s party was defeated. Imran Khan, who was named prime minister after his party secured victory in July, ran and won on a promise to stamp out corruption.
ADVERTISEMENT
“My conscience is clear,” Mr. Sharif told his supporters on Monday before leaving for court to hear the verdict. “I haven’t done anything which can put me to shame.”
Members of Mr. Sharif’s political party, Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz, gathered outside the court in Islamabad, the capital, to express support for their beleaguered leader. Hundreds of police officers were deployed in the capital to ensure security.
In a statement, Mr. Sharif’s party called the verdict “a dark decision” and vowed to protest.
His lawyers said they would appeal Monday’s conviction in a higher court. The lower court approved a request to imprison Mr. Sharif in Lahore, his hometown, instead of in Rawalpindi.